#Attachment D: Fiscal Year (FY) 2015 PortfolioStat 
This Attachment describes changes to the PortfolioStat process used in FY 2015, including reporting requirements for agencies. This attachment also describes the goals and topics which agencies and OMB will address through the FY2015 PortfolioStat process.

PortfolioStat  was established in FY 2012 to assess the maturity of Federal IT portfolio management, consolidate and eliminate duplicative spending on Commodity IT,  and improve agency processes to drive mission and customer-focused IT solutions. PortfolioStat is an evidence-based, data-driven review of agency IT portfolio management with agency leadership that continues to drive significant cost savings and efficiencies. To date, agencies have saved over $2.59 billion,  exceeding the $2.5 billion in savings opportunities identified in the original FY 2012 PortfolioStat sessions.

Each year this process has evolved to better align Federal IT policy goals to agency IT portfolios. As part of this evolution, starting in FY 2015 we have changed PortfolioStat from being an annual review session to quarterly reviews. OMB now collects agency progress data on a quarterly basis  and as such has an obligation to provide timely performance feedback throughout the year. Sharing this feedback quarterly will better allow OMB to track progress and recommend course corrections more frequently. 

In alignment with the Administration’s core IT objectives, PortfolioStat sessions will focus on three key areas: (1) driving value in Federal IT investments, (2) delivering world-class digital services, and (3) protecting Federal IT assets and information. Prior to each quarterly PortfolioStat session, agencies will be provided a scorecard including agency-specific performance metric data (see Fiscal Year 2015 PortfolioStat Performance Metrics below for specific metrics) and portfolio analysis agenda items. 

1.	The agenda of PortfolioStat sessions between OMB and agencies will focus on the following initiatives:
  - PortfolioStat Action Items. Agencies will discuss the status of each PortfolioStat action item reported through the IDC with OMB.

  - High Impact Programs. Agencies will use Attachment E: Investment and Portfolio Management Maturity Framework to describe the strategy, progress, critical milestones, risk, and expected impact of investments included in High Impact Programs. OMB will continue to work with agencies to designate investments included in High Impact Programs. 

  - Agency Digital Service Teams and United States Digital Service (USDS). OMB will review the agency’s progress in laying the organizational groundwork and establishing Digital Service Teams, the agency’s plan for effectively leveraging those resources, and the status of the performance of USDS activities. 

  - Commodity IT. Agencies will discuss how they use category management  to consolidate commodity IT assets, eliminate duplication between assets, and improve procurement and management of hardware, software, network, and telecom services. Furthermore, agencies will share lessons-learned related to commodity IT procurement policies and efforts to establish enterprise-wide inventories of related information.

  - IT Management Roles and Responsibilities. Agencies will discuss the status of their plans to implement the Common Baseline (Attachment A) and monitor the effectiveness of the CIO’s execution of the included roles and responsibilities. This should include discussion of the CIO’s relationship with other Senior Agency Officials, as well as those officials’ execution of listed roles and responsibilities.

  - Portfolio Management Maturity. Agencies will use the categories described in Attachment E: Investment and Portfolio Management Maturity Framework to evaluate the maturity of the agency’s People, Technology, Governance, Process, and Acquisition capabilities related to IT resources. Agencies should describe how their policies implement the portfolio management, capital planning, and other processes required in OMB Circular A-130, OMB Circular A-11’s capital planning and investment control guidance, and other OMB IT management policies, including this memorandum. For example, agencies should describe how agency priority goals, agency strategic objectives, the IT investment portfolio, the Information Resource Management (IRM) Strategic Plan, and the Enterprise Roadmap relate to each other and support the efficient and effective accomplishment of agency program and business objectives. Finally, agencies should describe how they select the system development lifecycle frameworks used in IT development activities, such as the use of incremental development and modular approaches prioritized by customer requirements. 

  - Data Center, Cloud, and Shared Services Optimization. Agencies will discuss their progress using cloud computing and shared services to optimize data center activities and achieve overall IT objectives. This includes a discussion of how the agency is using FedRAMP services and ensuring cloud services meet applicable FISMA requirements.

  - Cybersecurity. In addition to the “Protect” metrics in Fiscal Year 2015 PortfolioStat Performance Metrics below, PortfolioStat discussions will draw on topics covered in each agency’s quarterly Cybersecurity Self-Assessments. 

  - World-Class Customer Service. Agencies shall discuss how their portfolio management practices emphasize the customer-centric themes of the U.S. Digital Services Playbook , OMB’s capital planning and investment control guidance , and the Smarter IT Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goal . Agencies should describe where in their policies the following are implemented: the Playbook’s “Understand what people need” play, the capital planning guidance requirement for major investments to measure customer satisfaction performance metrics, and the Smarter IT CAP Goal’s focus on improving outcomes and customer satisfaction with Federal services.

  - Open Data. Experts have calculated that the potential economic benefits of open data are in the trillions of dollars.    The Federal government has made significant strides in opening up data to drive economic growth. Currently there are over 117,000 data sets available on data.gov. As a next step, agencies should improve the quality and types of datasets. Agencies should continue to evaluate their enterprise data inventory, conduct outreach to understand the users of their data, improve customer feedback mechanisms, and release datasets—subject to privacy, confidentiality, security, or other valid restrictions.

  - Streamlining reporting. OMB will continue to seek opportunities to reduce agency burden through revising reporting requirements and improving reporting channels through the ITDB and IDC as well as work with agencies to develop opportunities to improve the timeliness and reliability of reported ITDB data. 

2.	Quarterly PortfolioStat activities will take place in three phases: (1) Preparation; (2) Session; and (3) Post-Session. The following provides details on each phase with guidance on the schedule and requirements to ensure PortfolioStat is consistently implemented.  

  - Phase 1: Preparation. Following each quarterly agency IDC submission, OMB will analyze the latest data, consider trends in performance metrics over time, and review past PortfolioStat topics and PortfolioStat action items to identify topics for the upcoming PortfolioStat session’s discussion. OMB will send these topics, analysis, and proposed agenda for each agency to the agency’s PortfolioStat lead. Agencies are encouraged to work closely with OMB to provide clarifications and improvements to the preparation prior to the quarterly PortfolioStat session.
  - Phase 2: Session. Agency PortfolioStat leads shall work with OMB to schedule a PortfolioStat session to be held within eight weeks following the relevant IDC quarter’s submission deadline.  In the session, OMB and the agency CIO will review updates to the agency's Strategic IRM Plan and Enterprise Roadmap, trending data from the agency’s IDC and IT Dashboard submissions, discuss preceding quarterly PortfolioStat action items, status of investments included in High Impact Program(s), and select performance metrics. Based on the discussion, OMB and the agency will identify and agree on PortfolioStat action items (with specific deadlines) which OMB will send to the agency within two weeks of the completed session.  Where appropriate, results from these sessions shall be integrated into agency budget submissions and Congressional Budget Justifications. 
  - Phase 3: Post-Session. Upon receipt of PortfolioStat action items, agency PortfolioStat leads shall work with OMB to include updates on the status of these items in the next quarterly PortfolioStat.  Agencies that do not meet a deadline identified in a PortfolioStat action item shall brief the Federal CIO and the agency head at least once per quarter until the action item is complete.

Agencies shall describe progress implementing each PortfolioStat action item as a part of quarterly IDC reporting. At least once per year, agency heads shall review with the agency CIO and certify that the reported status of each PortfolioStat action item is accurate and send this certification to OMB.
